---
published: true
---

> _This paper was written for the class_ Milestones of Documentary _at SUNY New Paltz in April of 2016._

Their subjects are both people who were important to the civil rights movement, but these films could not be more unlike each other. “Don’t Look Back”, directed by D.A. Pennebaker, and “The Times of Harvey Milk”, directed by Rob Epstein, chronicle important moments in the lives of Bob Dylan, the world-famous singer-songwriter, and Harvey Milk, California’s first openly gay politician, respectively (Ebert). This paper will discuss these documentaries in contrast with each other, first delving into their distinct documentary styles, then reflecting on the ties between the subjects of the film, and finally analyzing the stark differences between the two films attitudes towards the news media.

First, it is important to talk about what these films do differently from each other in terms of their documentary styles. The key differences between the styles of these films create significant differences in how they need to be analyzed counter to each other. “Don’t Look Back” falls into the cinema verité style of documentary filmmaking, characterized as being recorded with simple equipment, lacking narration or significant post-production, and aiming to simply show the “truth” of a situation without injecting a directorial tone or biased narrative. Existing in what could be called an “observational” mode, it features long, unbroken, single-camera shots of scenes that aim to show the truths inherent in a person or situation, without attempting to editorialize or provide solutions to a problem (Hall). Most importantly, all or mostly all of the scenes in the film are contemporary: they are filmed specifically by the filmmakers, of the subjects in the film, exclusively for the film itself. One of the most notable (and infamous) of these scenes in the film falls towards the end, where an incensed Dylan is shown haranguing a reporter for Time magazine. On the other hand, “The Times of Harvey Milk" is anything but cinema verité. Falling into a more expository mode of filmmaking, very little of this film, aside from interview sections, was filmed by Epstein or his associates. The film instead gathers its story from archival footage, which is gathered from home videos and news organizations, and by interviewing subjects who were close to Milk. Little about this film, then, could be said to have been made contemporary to the period it is representing - it instead reflects on a past, instead of looking at a present as it happens. 

From here, we can then reflect briefly on the common ties between the subjects of these films. It can be said that Milk and Dylan were not all too different from each other. Both were important advocates for causes in the civil rights movement. Dylan contributed by writing protest songs and by playing music at protest rallies and benefit concerts, and Milk took his activism to the next level by becoming the first openly gay man elected to political office in California’s history (Corbett, Ebert). There is an argument to be made, though, that Dylan’s distance from the issues he sought to fight for, being a straight white male, insulated him from the kind of violence propagated against those who actually do fall into one of these minority groups, as Milk did. If Milk were simply a straight man advocating for gay rights causes in San Francisco, it’s not as likely that he would have paid for that activism with his life. It’s why we have “The Times of Harvey Milk” and not “The Times of Bob Dylan.” It is interesting, then, that “Don’t Look Back” almost never touches on the civil rights causes that were so important to Dylan; it simply shows him in the life, touring through the United Kingdom. The film seems content to while through those days without barely mentioning those causes; instead, the camera is on Dylan, not as an activist, but purely as a person and a musician. 
The bulk of the rest of this paper exists to contrast “Don’t Look Back” and “The Times of Harvey Milk” in terms of their attitudes towards news media. Pennebaker’s film as a whole can be interpreted as a critique of traditional news-gathering techniques (Hall). Epstein’s, however, is indebted to those techniques, due to its reliance on news organizations and their archival footage to tell its story. What happened between 1967 and 1985? Did the news media critiqued by Dylan change at all, or has it lived on in the same ways it always had? Did the media change its perspectives on topics of civil rights, or was it still looking at those situations through primarily a patriarchal, capitalist, and white lens?

According to author Jeanne Hall writing an essay for the book “Documenting the Documentary”, “Don’t Look Back” doesn’t just show Dylan critiquing the news media – Hall argues that the film itself is a critique of that news media in its own right. “As a cinema verité filmmaker,” Hall notes, “Pennebaker cannot advertise, explicate, or even admit to having any ‘hidden agenda.’” Despite this, the surprising amount of the film that is “comprised of Dylan’s dealings with the news media” leads her to believe that “Dont Look Back [sic] exposes and delights in the constructed nature of popular press images and words—and, crucially, effaces its own”, and she goes on to illustrate four ways that the film allows Dylan to do this. In the infamous scene where Dylan lambasts a reporter for Time magazine, he shows a concrete grasp of the inner workings of the press industry, especially Time, which is “well-known” for its “mode of production characterized by a strict division of labor (reporters send a ‘quota’ of words to an editor in New York City), as well as the simplified format of the finished product (‘it’s concise’ and ‘there’s pictures in it’)” (Hall). This knowledge allows him to easily take down the reporter, and his other critiques of news media and interviewers throughout the film serve to round out the narrative that Dylan (and possibly Pennebaker) believe the news media to be inherently flawed by its reverence of “facts” over “ideas”.

Epstein, unlike Pennebaker, exists in a whirlpool of news media in terms of his creation of “The Times of Harvey Milk”. The existence of the film is predicated on the existence of archival footage of Milk and the situations he was part of. Overwhelmingly, this footage came from news media, with a small amount coming from ‘home movies’ filmed by non-media individuals. Existing within the scope of the 1970s, this story does not have the benefit of happening at a time where video filming was easily accessible to the average person. The advent of the digital camcorder in the 1990s, and the smartphone in the 2000s, has brought the ability to film to the mainstream, beyond just those who were lucky enough to own a Super 8 or VHS camera in the 1970s and 1980s. Because of this, Epstein is truly indebted to a news media which, at the time, was not necessarily on the side of gay rights, even in San Francisco. News media in the days of Harvey Milk was overwhelmingly like the average member of society: white, straight, male-oriented, conservative. It could only show Milk’s situation, or any civil rights situation, from an outsider’s perspective. Individual anchors could show sympathy, but true empathy was absent, as it was in most of the rest of society. Even in as progressive of a town as San Francisco, these tropes lived on. Epstein’s reliance on these organizations that were so uninterested with the situations he and other gay men had to deal with in the 1970s and 1980s shows that he cannot possibly hold the same media-critiquing views as Dylan, and that if he does, the entire existence of “The Times of Harvey Milk” as it exists today is a kind of paradox in itself.

It’s clear that the media has not changed its views towards minorities any quicker than it has in the last fifteen years. Racism still exists, sexism still exists, and anti-queer sentiments still exist; however, the media at large, and the general population of our country, have never been more open and accepting of minorities of any kind than they have in the last decade. The 1980s themselves were a hotbed for discrimination against gay people, with HIV entering the media radar and reigniting a fervor of anti-gay sentiment which would last well into the 1990s. In the midst of that epidemic, “The Times of Harvey Milk” was released to theaters, giving the average straight citizen a sympathetic window into a world that they often knew nothing about. “Don’t Look Back”, in its own way, is also a window into a different world - but the world of celebrity has always been interesting to the general populace in a way that minorities and the civil rights movement have not. In the end, “The Times of Harvey Milk” is a movie that is really about more than just one man; we cannot say the same for “Don’t Look Back.”
